---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Can We Trust the Fed?
author:
  display_name: ''
  login: ''
  email: ''
  url: ''
excerpt: Why Central Bank Independence Leads to Unemployment
wordpress_id: 5709
wordpress_url: http://distilledmagazine.com/?p=5709
date: '2013-07-19 01:48:08 +0000'
date_gmt: '2013-07-19 01:48:08 +0000'
---
<p>Economists have spent the past few decades patting themselves on the back when it comes to independent central banks. Central banks, we are told, must be insulated from the political process, because without that insulation monetary policy would suffer what they call a time inconsistency problem.</p>
<p>Time inconsistency problems occur when a person reaches different conclusions about the same decision at different times. Imagine a dieter who decides Thursday (with fierce resolve) that he will have a salad for dinner Friday night. Unfortunately, as Friday rolls along and his resolve weakens, the salad plans are scratched in favor of a hamburger, with the diet put off for another day. The dieter faced the same decision, his Friday dinner, and reached different conclusions Thursday and Friday.</p>
<p>In monetary policy, time inconsistency arises with respect to inflation projections. In the classical analysis, the central bank has every interest to project that inflation will be low so that market participants will expect inflation to be low and plan accordingly. However, if the political process controls the central bank, market participants have every reason to believe that the central bank will use expansionary monetary policy at the first sign of trouble. This expansionary policy will raise inflation, reduce unemployment, and renege on its previous commitment to low inflation. The market will believe that the central bank will be time inconsistent; therefore, it will expect inflation to be higher than the central bank projects.</p>
<p class="break">In response to this problem, Ben Bernanke and the Federal Reserve are granted independence by the U.S. government. Aside from periodic appointments, Bernanke and his board of governors enjoy independence from the threat of popular opinion.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, with the Great Recession has come a new economic problem. Rather than persistent inflation, the economy suffers from chronic underemployment with inflation running consistently below, not above, target. In this situation, Bernanke and the Fed want to convey that monetary policy will be looser in the future – trying to bring inflation expectations up, rather than down. According to the <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Philips_curve" target="_blank">Phillips Curve relationship</a>, higher inflation expectations should lead to lower unemployment. As Princeton economist <a href="http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/20/a-potentially-tragic-taper/" target="_blank">Paul Krugman noted</a>, Bernanke must convey “the message that it will wait to tighten, that it will let the economy recover and allow inflation to rise before hiking rates. To use my old phrase, it must credibly promise to be irresponsible.”</p>
<p>With the Fed’s much lauded independence, however, comes a new time inconsistency problem. With conservative central-bank governors independently running the Fed, Bernanke is having a serious problem gaining traction with the idea that it will continue to care about employment. In essence, the worry is that at the first sign of better employment, the Fed will snatch the punch bowl away and return to a hardline focus on inflation. It will not be able to keep its commitment to loose monetary policy in the face of any positive news.</p>
<p>Nowhere was this more evident than in the 550 point fall of the Dow Jones Index in the day and a half following Bernanke’s suggestion of future tapering last month. Despite consistent commitments that <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/3713f096-447e-11e2-8fd7-00144feabdc0.html" target="_blank">the Fed will keep monetary policy near zero</a> until the unemployment rate falls below 6.5%, hints at tapering sparked a major selloff. It took a full week for the market to be assured that a return to a hawkish Fed was not imminent.</p>
<p class="break">It seems that central bankers are not a very trustworthy lot when it comes to balancing inflation and employment. Whereas economists believe that the public has a time inconsistency problem with inflation, it seems that the market believes that central bankers have a time inconsistency problem with employment.</p>
<p>As the market waits with bated breath for Bernanke to speak again today, we again face the fear and uncertainty of <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/100891176" target="_blank">whether and when the Fed will change its monetary tune</a>. The result of this uncertainty, unfortunately, is higher unemployment. Rational employers will hire fewer workers in response to expansionary monetary policy because they cannot expect central bankers to be credible in their commitments. Perhaps central banking should not be left to such a dogmatic lot.</p>
