---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Economic Growth Is Not Over
author:
  display_name: ''
  login: ''
  email: ''
  url: ''
excerpt: Even if the Industrial Revolution was a coincidence of history, economic
  growth can continue by increasing demand what we already can produce.
wordpress_id: 6064
wordpress_url: http://distilledmagazine.com/?p=6064
date: '2013-07-29 19:21:05 +0000'
date_gmt: '2013-07-29 19:21:05 +0000'
---
<p>Benjamin Wallace-Wells of <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/nymag.com">New York Magazine</a> wrote an interesting article putting forward the idea that America’s fantastic history of growth <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/economic-growth-2013-7">may simply be an historical accident</a>.  Citing work by Northwestern economist <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/gordon">Robert Gordon</a>, he worries that America’s strong growth may simply have been <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Is%20US%20Economic%20Growth%20Over.pdf">an artifact of lucky timing</a>. America’s founding came on the heels of the first <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Industrial_Revolution">Industrial Revolution</a> (mid to late 18th century), a time that saw real growth in living standards for the first time since the Roman Empire.  This explosion of growth was largely unprecedented in human history and rode inventions of steam power and textile mills to massive increases in productivity.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">    The <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Second_Industrial_Revolution">second Industrial Revolution</a> (late 19th century) coincided perfectly with the rise of American economic leadership.  Focused on steel, railroads, and electricity, the second Industrial Revolution saw America at the center of economic growth and world innovation. In its wake, it brought inventions such as the washing machine and the dishwasher that dramatically decreased the labor necessary to maintain a home.  In practical impact, it released women anchored to the family home and allowed them to enter the workforce to pursue much more productive jobs.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">    Gordon and Wallace-Wells make the important point that no modern invention has the potential to have the wide-ranging impact of the washing machine or the dishwasher.  As Wallace-Wells notes, “If you take this perspective, it is no wonder that the productivity gains have diminished since the early seventies.  The social transformations brought by computers and the Internet cannot match any of this.”  While computers and the Internet may have revolutionized the way that we are able to communicate, they cannot match the dual impact of allowing families to urbanize (go to mega-productive factory work from near-subsistence farming) and allowing women to dedicate their labor to the workforce.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">    Gordon takes the perspective that major technological innovations take a long period of time to be fully integrated into the economy.  Up until about 1970, Gordon argues that the American economy was still continuing to integrate derivative inventions from the second Industrial Revolution.  Following the 70s, he cites what he calls a third Industrial Revolution around computers that climaxed in the 1990s with the Internet boom.  The third Industrial Revolution, however, is much less significant in its potential to revolutionize production and will be <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Is%20US%20Economic%20Growth%20Over.pdf">marked by slower growth</a>.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">    Debating growth goes all the way back to the period of accelerating growth ignited by the first Industrial Revolution.  <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Thomas_Robert_Malthus">Thomas Robert Malthus</a> famously argued in 1798 that the possibility of growth would be checked by the impossibility of sustaining a larger population.  As seen by the tremendous growth in both population and the economy, Malthus neglected to account for the impact of improving technology in the growth of food and use of resources.</p>
<p dir="ltr">    Some 15 years later, the <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Luddites">Luddites</a> commenced a series of attacks on the new machinery of the first Industrial Revolution.  The Luddites were artisans who believed that the machinery threatened their jobs and their economic existence.  They reasoned that full employment would not be possible with so many goods produced by so few workers.  It followed that technological progress should stop for the good of the workers.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">    The Luddites’ strongest predictions have also been proven wrong by history. An increase in production was matched by a corresponding increase in consumer demand for the goods produced.  Although the periods marking the first and second Industrial Revolutions were marked with great technological development, their aftermath saw periods of full employment along with higher productivity.  Technological advancement does not necessarily mean higher unemployment.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">    It is important to pause here and note a logical fallacy.  Seeing the history of unsuccessful warnings about the advancement of technology, such as those of the Luddites, many economists and historians take the position that productivity cannot be bad for employment.  Seeing that previous arguments have been disproven by history, they argue that the issue has been decided.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Gordon and Wallace-Wells bring up an important counter-argument to that position.  This history of disproving the skeptics may have simply been a historical accident.  If there were factors that were present in the past two centuries that are less present now, then they may not come to our economic rescue as they have in the past.  We may simply have been lucky.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">The weakness in Gordon’s argument is a weakness that is common to many economic evaluations of growth.  Namely, it focuses on the growth of productivity alone, rather than the growth of demand for the goods produced.  While it is true that growth is slowing down in the modern era, it is more difficult to argue that this slowdown is due to decreased productivity.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Economic transactions have two sides.  Someone has to make the good sold, and someone has to want to buy the good at the price sold.  At least since John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s, it has been clear that one side of that transaction does not necessarily follow from the other.  In other words, just because society has the capability of producing a certain amount of goods does not mean that there will be buyers ready to purchase those goods.  From this insight, <a href="www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/pais/people/brassett/teaching/keynes.ppt">John Maynard Keynes</a> was able to build a framework that explained why workers can remain involuntarily unemployed for long periods of time.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Gordon and Wallace-Wells bring up many factors of concern.  Most importantly, <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/is-growth-over-robert-j-gordon-at-ted2013">Gordon cites</a> stagnating education, an aging population, a debt overhang, and increasing inequality.  These factors are balanced between factors that slow productivity growth (education and an aging population) and factors that slow demand growth (debt overhang and increasing inequality, though this could slow both productivity and demand).  His solution and explanation, however, focuses entirely on productivity and innovation.  He argues that a lack of innovation is the primary cause of our slowdown in growth.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">A world that is constrained by its ability to produce goods and services will suffer from excess demand.  If America is in need of innovation, we should see rising prices and a shortage of workers for each job.  Instead, America has high un- and underemployment at all levels of the economy.  Recent <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Underemployed%20Report%2021.pdf" target="_blank">research by the Center for College Affordability &amp; Productivity</a> shows that 48 percent of college graduates are employed in jobs that traditionally have not required a college education.  In America and Europe alike, everyone knows plenty of people who are working below their ability.  It is difficult for me to believe that this is a society constrained by its lack of productive output.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Outside of the confines of the United States, it is even more glaring that inadequate supply is not what constrains future growth.  There are entire continents that are grossly underutilized.  If we believe that groups of people start out roughly equal in their productive capacity, then there is huge growth that can come from these underutilized continents.  Much as eastern Asia is growing today, there is potential for others to catch up and integrate into the world economy.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Instead, current stagnation is and has been caused by a lack of aggregate demand.  It is not that productive capacity does not exist; it is that we have not found a way to build institutions that enhance the trust between productive and unproductive sectors of America’s economy and of the world.  Education outcomes are stagnating precisely because the economy does not demand the education that we already have.  If half of the college-educated are underemployed now, why would others, especially those who will not be attending elite universities, borrow money to join their ranks?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Outside of America, lack of demand is driven by high savings rates and huge trade surpluses.  China has grown more than any country over the past 30 years, but has merely driven its profits back into investment in business productivity, rather than allowing growth in consumer demand.  Before a recent policy change to <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/japan-abe-stimulate-recovery/">Abenomics</a>, Japan has run a similarly large surplus, demonstrating that they are producing more than they are willing to consume.  After the adoption of the euro, the German balance of trade surged to surplus as well, meaning that the second, third, and fourth largest economies have been producing far more than they are willing to consume.  Demand for products, not productivity is falling behind.</p>
<p>Gordon and Wallace-Wells bring up some very important ideas.  America and the advanced economies are seeing a slowdown in innovation and in growth.  In fact, if our financial innovations have been unsustainable, that slowdown in growth may actually have been understated by our performance over the past couple of decades.  However, this does not mean an end to growth.  We have huge amounts of underutilized capacity.  If we were to build the trust and institutions to utilize that capacity and to demand what they have to offer, then production would not yet be an issue.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
