---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: '"Call me [character reference number 5803]..."'
author:
  display_name: ''
  login: ''
  email: ''
  url: ''
wordpress_id: 520
wordpress_url: http://www.distilledmagazine.com/blog/?p=122
date: '2012-08-18 18:55:15 +0000'
date_gmt: '2012-08-18 18:55:15 +0000'
---
<p>The mathmos are coming! <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/paul_revere.jpg">The mathmos are coming!</a> They'll steal your books! Burn down your department building! And ship you to Siberia!</p>
<p>Fine. I exaggerate. They won't ship you to Siberia, but they'll make it much more difficult for you to get funding (I'd rather Siberia please).</p>
<p>Writer and doctoral candidate in psychology at Columbia, Maria Konnikova, shares a few ways that <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/humanities-arent-a-science-stop-treating-them-like-one">quantitative modeling has infiltrated Humanities' green and pleasant land</a> in <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/www.scientificamerican.com">Scientific American</a>:</p>
<blockquote><p>Take, for instance, a <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/28002">recent paper</a> that draws conclusions about the relative likelihood that certain stories are originally based in real-world events by looking at the (very complicated) mathematics of social networks. The researchers first model what the properties of real social networks look like. They then apply that model to certain texts (<em>Beowulf, </em>the<em> Iliad,</em> and<em> Táin Bó Cuailnge</em>, on the mythological end, and<em>Les Misérables, Richard III, </em>the <em>Fellowship of the Ring</em>, and <em>Harry Potter</em> on the fictional end) to see how much the internal social networks of the characters resemble those that exist in real life. And then, based on that resemblance, they conclude which narratives are more likely to have originated in actual history: to wit, <em>Beowulf</em> and the <em>Iliad</em> are more likely reality-based than Shakespeare or Tolkien or—gasp—even that most real-life-like of narratives, <em>Harry Potter</em>.</p></blockquote>
<p><!--more--></p>
<p>As if literature wasn't enough, Konnikova describes how the statistical pressure of using math and model-based arguments has now gaseously filled the halls of history:</p>
<blockquote><p>Nowhere is that temptation more evident than in history, where quantification and precise explanation is so incredibly enticing—and so politically useful. Witness the rise of <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/human-cycles-history-as-science-1.11078">Cliodynamics</a> (no apologies to Clio, from whom it takes its name; I don’t think the muse would be overly thrilled): the use of scientific methodology (nonlinear mathematics, computer simulations, large-N statistical analyses, information technologies) to illuminate historical events – and, presumably, be able to predict when future “cycles” will occur.</p></blockquote>
<p>Konnikova identifies one reason why these exercises are futile:</p>
<blockquote><p>It’s tempting to want things to be nice and neat. To rely on an important-seeming analysis instead of drowning in the quagmire of nuance and incomplete information. To think black and white instead of grey. But at the end, no matter how meticulous you’ve been, history is not a hard science. Nor is literature. Or political science. Or ethics. Or linguistics. Or psychology. Or any other number of disciplines. They don’t care about your highly involved quantitative analysis. They behave by their own rules. And you know what? Whether you agree with me or not, what you think—and what I think—matters not a jot to them.</p></blockquote>
<p>I agree. But you may ask, what harm could be done by wayward intellectual peregrinations?</p>
<p>For many involved in the humanities the work of these model builders may be more accurately described as a drunken stumble in the dark. Often these models are simplistic applications of basic math to a large data set without even a hint of context. Sure, you'll get slim, elegant results in the end, and these results will have gorgeous numbers paraded up-and-down the catwalk of a stats table, but what do they really tell us?</p>
<p>Konnikova makes precisely this point in her article, and points out that stories based on models are easier to tell than stories that are complex:</p>
<blockquote><p>We’re held back by those biases that plague almost all attempts to quantify the qualitative, selection on the dependent variable and post hoc hypotheses and explanations. We look at instances where the effect exists and posit a cause—and forget all the times the exact same cause led to no visible effect, or to an effect that was altogether different. It’s so easy to tell stories based on models. It’s so hard to remember that they are nothing more than stories. (It’s not just history or literature. Much of fMRI research is blamed for precisely that reason: if you don’t have an <em>a priori</em> hypothesis but then see something interesting, it’s all too tempting to explain its involvement after the fact and pretend that that’s what you’d meant to do all along. But the two approaches are not one and the same.)</p></blockquote>
<p>This is why I believe that the situation is very dire. From the rational enlightenment onward we have been in thrall to the powerful story told by mathematical models. They are coherent. They are logical. And they are ostensibly falsifiable. But they are based on several assumptions that probe into the truly difficult questions that have underpinned the whole project of the humanities ever since Petrarch mused pensively from atop Mount Ventoux.</p>
<p>Economics is a particularly egregious offender, but that will have to wait for another post and a few stiff shots of whiskey.</p>
<p>While these projects may seem harmless, they are using up valuable time, resources, and human capital that could be used on other more robust means of intellectual exploration.</p>
<p>Even worse, these projects may even exert massive political or economic influence. For example, what would a typical politician or policy maker prefer: a policy proposal backed by reams of statistical data or one filled with case studies and based on the intuition of practitioners and scholars. It has become increasingly harder to argue against numbers when they are so much easier to understand.</p>
<p>So the challenge is how do we counter the prevailing mathematical model-based narrative? Somehow we have to tell a story that is even more compelling, one that is at once digestible but also robust. It certainly is possible. For example, economist John Maynard Keynes did a fine job in combining approaches and exercising influence within academia and among policy makers.</p>
<p>We must seek to reclaim the full scope of our creative faculties in the pursuit of our fundamental hunger for understanding, and our desire to exert control over ourselves and our surroundings.</p>
<p>Until then, I think I'll just give put my econometrics research textbook next to my thesaurus — two books I only use when absolutely necessary.</p>
<p><em>Sarang Shah is a writer temporarily based out of London and the founder and editor-in-chief of Distilled Magazine.</em></p>
