---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: From Glass Ceiling to Glass-Steagall
author:
  display_name: ''
  login: ''
  email: ''
  url: ''
excerpt: Senator Elizabeth Warren is her usual well spoken, educated, & respectful
  self when she appears on CNBC to discuss why we need to bring back Glass-Steagall.
wordpress_id: 5976
wordpress_url: http://distilledmagazine.com/?p=5976
date: '2013-07-27 21:15:56 +0000'
date_gmt: '2013-07-27 21:15:56 +0000'
---
<p dir="ltr">Elizabeth Warren is a fluke and should never have been elected in the first place. Not only is she well-versed in policy, she devises it. Not only is she considerate of the views of her constituents, she also considers her opponents’ stances (before she effectively rebuts them). Not only does she represent Massachusetts, she seeks to represent the country at large.</p>
<p dir="ltr">All of these seem like great qualities to have in all our politicians. That’s why Warren, a former professor and the mind behind the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, should never have been elected. Take for example the following interview she recently gave on CNBC:</p>
<p><code><br />
<object id="cnbcplayer" width="400" height="380" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://download.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=6,0,40,0" bgcolor="#000000"><param name="allowfullscreen" value="true" /><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always" /><param name="quality" value="best" /><param name="scale" value="noscale" /><param name="wmode" value="transparent" /><param name="salign" value="lt" /><param name="src" value="http://plus.cnbc.com/rssvideosearch/action/player/id/3000182337/code/cnbcplayershare" /><param name="pluginspage" value="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" /><embed id="cnbcplayer" width="400" height="380" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" src="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/cnbcplayershare1" allowfullscreen="true" allowscriptaccess="always" quality="best" scale="noscale" wmode="transparent" salign="lt" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" bgcolor="#000000" /></object> </code></p>
<p>In the clip, Senator Warren discusses her proposal to bring back the Glass-Steagall Act. First enacted in 1933, Glass-Steagall separated commercial and corporate banking, ensuring that commercial deposits (i.e. the savings under your pillow case that you deposit at the bank) are separated institutionally from the far riskier leveraging typical of corporate banking.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Warren tells the story of the enactment of Glass-Steagall, which existed until 1999 when it was effectively repealed by the Graham-Leach-Bliley Act, and how this New Deal era legislation insulated U.S. economy from the constant boom-and-bust cycle that characterized much of its history.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Warren concedes that bringing back Glass-Steagall isn’t the silver bullet for fixing all of our financial woes, but she does point out that our financial services system remained relatively stable until a wave of deregulation began to weaken Glass-Steagall in the 1980s.</p>
<p dir="ltr">When the host disagrees about whether the historical record corroborates Warren’s claim that Glass-Steagall helped usher in a period of relative financial stability, Warren rebuts him with a detailed and assertive recapitulation of the facts while also acknowledging his position.</p>
<p dir="ltr">In other words, Warren knows what she is talking about and isn’t afraid to engage with critics while allowing them to save face when she knows she is right.</p>
<p dir="ltr">These qualities of well-informed assertiveness and courageous leadership are hard to find in politics because our democratic system selects for incompetence and weakness. We assume that a politician lives or dies by the approval of their constituency come election time. That assumption has increasingly been further from the truth.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Politicians, in fact, live or die by the vast amounts of money they must raise for themselves and others. Take a look at the following CQ Roll Call article about Republican Senators and Senate hopefuls gathering together for marathon fundraising sessions<a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/senate-republicans-dial-for-dollars-en-masse"> to raise money for their campaigns</a> and the National Republican Senatorial Committee. As Roll Call points out, the push comes as Republicans attempt to counter the Democrats recent fundraising streak:</p>
<p dir="ltr">The effort to get more senators personally involved was intended, in part, to help reverse a trend. Recently, Democrats have been far more generous in committee donations out of their personal campaign accounts.</p>
<p dir="ltr">In the 2012 cycle, 20 of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee’s top 25 largest contributors were senators’ campaigns, and they gave a total of $8.6 million, according to figures compiled by Political MoneyLine. By comparison, nine of the NRSC’s top 25 contributors were senators’ campaigns and collectively gave just more than $1 million. Many of the GOP’s top donations came from joint fundraising committees.</p>
<p dir="ltr">“We’ve been stressing that with Republicans,” NRSC Chairman Jerry Moran said in an interview, just after making calls himself. “Almost all senators have contributed from their leadership PACs, which is limited to $15,000. And then the request is: Can you do more from your own political campaigns?”</p>
<p dir="ltr">Not only must politicians spend endless time on their own campaigns, they must also contribute to overall party fundraising. As the Democratic side of fundraising shows, <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/call-time-congressional-fundraising_n_2427291.html">courtesy of this Huffington Post story</a>, “call-time” (the euphemistic term for one-on-one fundraising) takes up a significant portion of time for both the Congressperson and his or her staff:</p>
<p dir="ltr">"It bites into your private life. It bites into your leisure time," said former Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.), who is now being considered for a Senate seat. "You shouldn't only do what you have to do, you should be able to read. ... It cuts into time members spend with each other."</p>
<p dir="ltr">"Any member who follows that schedule will be completely controlled by their staff, handed statements that their staff prepared, speaking from talking points they get emailed from leadership," said Miller. "They certainly are going to be asking questions to witnesses at hearings that their staff suggested. If they offer an amendment it will be something that leadership suggested they offer ... to try to give them a little boost back home."</p>
<p dir="ltr">Spending so much time on fundraising naturally pushes members of Congress away from critical thinking and principled positions towards more conservative, technocratic, and less provocative policies:</p>
<p dir="ltr">Working a schedule like that as a freshman teaches a member of Congress about the institution's priorities. "It really does affect how members of Congress behave if the most important thing they think about is fundraising," [Rep. Brad] Miller said. "You end up being nice to people that probably somebody needs to be questioning skeptically. It's a fairly disturbing suggested schedule. You won't ask tough questions in hearings that might displease potential contributors, won't support amendments that might anger them, will tend to vote the way contributors want you to vote."</p>
<p dir="ltr">[Former Rep. Tom] Perriello said that the drive for fundraising winds up containing "an enormous anti-populist element, particularly for Dems, who are most likely to be hearing from people who can write at least a $500 check. They may be liberal, quite liberal in fact, but are also more likely to consider the deficit a bigger crisis than the lack of jobs."</p>
<p dir="ltr">The time spent fundraising, he added, also "helps to explain why many from very safe Dem districts who might otherwise be pushing the conversation to the left, or at least willing to be the first to take tough votes, do not – because they get their leadership positions by raising from the same donors noted above."</p>
<p dir="ltr">With limited staff resources and time, attention is clearly diverted away from policy and into politics. That often explains why lobbyists infest many corners of Congress (as much of the policy work ends up being outsourced to them). The lack of time spent on policy explains why technocratic policies that fit existing models and come with “binders full of data” are preferred. Solutions backed by simplistic easy-to-understand models corroborated by lots of statistics are appealing because they are quick, seemingly unimpeachable solutions to our toughest problems. Politicians and their staff have no reason to carefully consider the complexity of the problems and the failure of previous policies to address these issues.</p>
<p dir="ltr">In other words, politicians are encouraged to be very good at raising money and looking good (and not much else). If you are knowledgeable and thoughtful before you run for office, it seems likely that the demands of the job will wear down whatever reserves of courage, leadership, and intelligence you once held so dear to the functioning of our democratic system.</p>
<p dir="ltr">As one of the CNBC hosts says in the close to the above clip: “No one wants to look professorial.”</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
