---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: The Ideology of Fear and Motivation
author:
  display_name: admin
  login: admin
  email: brecht.savelkoul@gmail.com
  url: ''
author_login: admin
author_email: brecht.savelkoul@gmail.com
excerpt: When you're an artist there are times the most difficult task society asks
  of you is to simply get out of bed. The ideology of fear and the ontological imperative
  are explored.
wordpress_id: 7859
wordpress_url: http://distilledmagazine.com/?p=7859
date: '2013-09-06 23:54:08 +0000'
date_gmt: '2013-09-06 23:54:08 +0000'
---
<p dir="ltr">THE IDEOLOGY OF FEAR AND MOTIVATION</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">The subject of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear" target="_blank">fear</a> has been an inspirational and curious discussion for debate in my professional life for quite some time.  Once I realized that all of my shortcomings as a professional artist had to do with personal insecurities, I began to rethink my existence up to the very point at which I had the epiphany.  I have forgotten the age I was when this awakening occurred, probably in my early or mid twenties.  Looking back on what I have been able to achieve, personally and professionally, the only thing I would change is the speediness of which I acted upon this quest.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">The word regret should not be in one's vocabulary, ever.  If you regret an instance in your life, it means that you are unhappy with where you currently are in your life.  Every choice and decision you make, from once you awaken to when you sleep, will determine where you find yourself tomorrow.  The actions that you choose based upon choices that pertain to decisions, presented within your path, will determine the events that will follow the day after and the day after that.  It is very simple to understand the fluidity of a life based on choice rather than circumstance.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">This article is about perception over anything else.  I use the subject of fear as a catalyst for an individuals perception toward internal and external growth.  Whenever we are placed in a situation there are an undetermined amount of choices to make in any given situation, and with that, we have an undetermined amount of outcomes pertaining to those choices.  With each outcome, there are reactions based off the initial act.  I use the word reaction instead of consequence because the emotive tone of consequence already works as a negative in the outcome:  a reaction to the act, or, an outcome to the choice.  Perception is the overall reason for an individual's method in decision making.  The theory behind someone’s reasoning for the choices they make in any given situation is solely based on the individuals self perception.  The way someone looks at themselves, emotionally/mentally/physically, will determine a particular choice made within a situation.  And within the individuals perception determining the choices made, there lies within the proposed thought a host of emotions and thoughts which all create a particular existence.  Simply, a persons thoughts and feelings felt toward themselves determines how they choose different choices, and, they choose these choices based on their feelings and thoughts which are controlled by their emotions.  The emotion that I’m writing about that I feel is the main cause for all choices made in any given situation for an individual is referred to as fear.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">By conservative definition, fear is revered as an emotion of distress.  Fear is defined as being a feeling or thought of apprehension due to agitation or anxiety towards a perceived notion of danger.  The ’danger’ one may perceive, being the cause in a persons anxiety within a given circumstance, will either be physically tangible or mentally assumed based on emotive projection.  The assumed ’danger’ in any given situation may be an entire falsehood without physical claim to back it up.  This is a severe problem.  Such a problem that, when investigated instance upon instance, the majority of proposed danger that causes fear to exist within a persons daily perception is nothing more than a make believe fantasy.  When you're an artist, there are times that the most difficult task society asks of you is to simply get out of bed.  This is known as an <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology" target="_blank">ontological imperative</a>.  To open your eyes is to accept your role as a creative entity for the day.  Why is getting out of bed such a difficult task to perform at times for an artist?  The answer is an ambiguous one:  fear of the unknown.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">The term ’fear of the unknown’ is used loosely in the language of self-help techniques.  In fact, the term has grossly oversaturated the self-help terminology market so obtusely, just as the term ’organic’ is used to describe one's aesthetic style or method.  Huh?  You mean this kumquat in my hand isn’t the only thing in my immediate surroundings that can be defined as organic?  You mean the fluidity of acrylic paints on the canvas above my <a href="http://www.ikea.com/us/en/catalog/products/20129592/" target="_blank">Ikea dresser</a> is also organic?…</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Ridiculous or not, it’s the present critical reality for art connoisseurs and art critics definition of ones aesthetic just as ‘fear of the unknown’ relates to psychological evaluation.  Essentially, being afraid of anything uncertain to occur or to experience is to be afraid of losing personal control of yourself and your environment.  It’s extremely valid to feel completely vulnerable and lost when you don’t know what is too happen next on the pendulum of creative occurrence, but it is also a moral travesty to allow your mental being a complete loss of emotive restraint due to a possible disillusionment of personal order and control.  I write ‘disillusionment’ instead of certainty because the fear one internally suffers is always based/created on an assumption rather than fact.  I’ve just finished the greatest body of work in my career, to date, and nothing will come of it because it doesn’t matter…:  Disillusionment.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Whatever we put out, we get back.  Whatever we seek to discover, we obtain.  This is the basis of the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_attraction" target="_blank">law of attraction</a>; whatever we hope to find in our mental being, we discover in our physical being.  Indeed, <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Descartes" target="_blank">Descartes</a> ontological certainty of the physical being separate from the mental still remains within the imperative language of philosophy, however, we are speaking about the mind being responsible for  perception through creative use which isn’t possible without the physical being attributing the finality of creative thought.  As an artist, the mind and body are most certainly one being.  Without the body, the mind is an organ instead of an instrument for creativity.  Therefore, if you think you have nothing more to creatively say, then you will have nothing more to creatively contribute.  If you think your work is ground breaking and is the next level of your conceptual being,  then you will flourish with creative ideas that will continually blossom before your eyes.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">If you do what so many of us tend to do, which is to use both the negative and positive in your thinking towards your work, then you will continually remain stagnant instead of moving forward.  They both cancel each other out which prevents any form of movement.  This simply happens from personal fear of losing control of your own creative thoughts and conceptual explorative.  So the statement,  I’ve just finished the greatest body of work in my career, to date, and nothing will come of it because it doesn't matter, exists because you are afraid of what you can’t foresee from a critics perspective and what you can’t control from the audiences perspective.  The assumption you create in your mind about your work not being good, strong, poignant, pertinent and purposeful is there because it’s the only thing you truly can’t create or invent on your own.  All you can really focus on is how you think your work should best be executed, not reviewed.  This, of course, is part of the struggle for an artist.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Without going into more in depth of the whys/how’s for fears in creative thinking, I will simply offer an easy remedy:  Let it go.  Just let it go.  Creating a piece of art, let alone several pieces of art, is hard enough.  Stop focusing on the fear of what you do not have control over and focus on what you are able to control.  You control what you create, your thoughts, your actions, and you can even control who and what you are.  Focus on that, don’t focus on the other stuff that happens after you finish that great body of work, let the curators/gallery directors/art dealers handle that.  The only thing you should focus on is being the best artist you can be.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Create, create, CREATE.  The world would be nothing without its artisans of all types.  Artists give this world a reason to question authority and identity, to define your reasoning within emotion, escapism, to heal and to deal with the loss and gain of romantic love or to conquer fear and be at peace.  Artists are the heart and art is the pulse.  Know this and never let that leave your being.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>By Zach Christopher</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
