---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'A Bridge Too Far: N.S.A. and P.R.I.S.M.'
author:
  display_name: ''
  login: ''
  email: ''
  url: ''
excerpt: Are we winning the war on terror when we're losing freedom everyday? How
  the NSA and PRISM bring fears of a totalitarian state.
wordpress_id: 5996
wordpress_url: http://distilledmagazine.com/?p=5996
date: '2013-07-28 08:13:17 +0000'
date_gmt: '2013-07-28 08:13:17 +0000'
---
<p><strong>NSA and PRISM</strong></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>On June 6 2013, The Guardian revealed classified details about the activities of the American National Security Agency (NSA) and its clandestine surveillance program PRISM. Data about numerous individuals worldwide (mostly non-USA according to official statements from the US-government) are being collected and analysed: which websites you visit, what you like on Facebook, who your friends are, who your email correspondents are, … everything is processed, analysed and saved. The justification? “State security”: protecting the free American society and its citizens against terrorist attacks. And thus, we trade privacy for security. A fair deal?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><strong>Nothing to hide</strong><br />
One could (and a lot of people will) argue that because the US-government will find nothing alarming in the data they collect from most individuals because they’ve no wrong to hide, it’s a fair deal: good citizens have nothing to fear while the society they live is better protected against (terroristic) evil. An illustration is this statement by the Republican senator Lindsey Graham in defence of the NSA: "I don’t think you're talking to the terrorists. I know you're not. I know I'm not, so we don't have anything to worry about". But this nothing-to-hide-argument is, as a I argued elsewhere, based on a false premise. The value of privacy is not exclusively based on its potential to hide wrongdoing. What makes privacy valuable is pluralistic and context dependent. For example, the value of privacy is also grounded in the connection between our ability to monitor and to control who has access to the information about us and accordingly our ability to build and sustain social relationships, distinctive in nature, with different people. Another aspect, among others, that makes privacy valuable is the need to have a space where we can be ourselves.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>The ongoing industrialization and urbanization created a mechanical network of interdependent individuals which caused an anonymization of interhuman relations in the public sphere, contributed to the need for a private sphere where ‘real’ and human relations are possible. In short, there are other arguments available than merely ‘hiding a wrong’ to state ‘this is none of your (or the state’s) business’. One can see that, when privacy and state security are placed on a balance, interpreting privacy as a synonym for ‘hiding wrong’ leads to an underestimation of the importance of privacy in the lives of today’s world citizens. In deciding how to balance state security concerns with privacy concerns, one should acknowledge the complete value and importance of privacy and not some easy-selling caricature of privacy and its value.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><strong>The right balance to win a war on terror</strong><br />
All I have done so far is countering an invalid argument in favour of trading privacy for state security. I have not denied that there is a balance, a trade-off to be made between privacy and state security. I think US-president Obama is right in pointing out this trade-off in his defence of the NSA-activities. He states that “it’s important to recognize that you can’t have a hundred percent security and also then have a hundred percent privacy and zero inconvenience”. While I agree with president Obama that there exists a trade-off between state security and privacy, I disagree with him when he argues that “in the abstract, you can complain about Big Brother and how this is a potential, you know — you know, program run amok. But when you actually look at the details, then I think we've struck the right balance”.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>According to president Obama and as can be read in the leaked Verizon court order, no content of telephone conversations is tapped without the authorization of a federal judge. What is processed on massive scale is just the meta-data (for example the phone numbers of caller and recipient, the time and duration of the phone call and the location of each of the participants during the call) of telephone conversations. One could say that this information is just public transactional data needed for good service, like the information on an envelope of a letter. It’s just functional information and thus no violation of privacy exists when these meta-data are processed. But is this argument correct?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Does the fact that only meta-data are processed means the right balance is struck? I agree with Gary Pruitt, president of the associated press, that this is not the case: for example, "A person who knows all of another's travels can deduce whether he is a weekly churchgoer, a heavy drinker, a regular at the gym, an unfaithful husband, an outpatient receiving medical treatment, an associate of particular individuals or political groups". The fact that, as president Obama puts it, “When it comes to telephone calls, nobody is listening to your telephone calls. That’s not what this program’s about”, does not automatically mean there’s a right balance between privacy and security. Collecting, processing and saving meta-data of telephone calls is a violation of one’s privacy. And thus, we have to ask whether the gains in terms of state security by these violations outbalance the costs of giving (some of) our privacy away. I think the costs are pretty high, too high.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>I doubt whether the collection and processing of meta-data on such a massive scale (all telephone conversations) is proportional with respect to the goal of state security. I have my doubts whether it is really necessary to keep track of such data of every individual. In defence of this claim I would like to use the higher mentioned statement of Senator Graham against, while originally used in favour of, the NSA activities: "I don’t think you're talking to the terrorists. I know you're not”. If you know I’m not talking to a terrorist, why than do you have to collect, process and save personal information about me? The way this NSA data collection works treats every individual as a potential threat, as a suspect. I find this a bridge too far.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Sure the main purpose of NSA databases is data-mining, where algorithms are used to find suspicious patterns in meta-data, and not the direct observation of particular individuals. But these databases still give the US-government a powerful new tool to exercise, quite easy, retrospective surveillance on everyone. I wonder if, by giving up personal rights such as a right to privacy, we’re not trading one evil for another. Sure, terrorist will have a harder time to strike or cause harm, sure, state security will improve. But on the other hand, if a state becomes so powerful that it can place everyone under constant surveillance (even retrospective and within the private sphere), shouldn’t we have to fear the birth of a totalitarian state? Shouldn’t we have to fight this as much as terrorism?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>To those who find my last thought on the creation of a totalitarian state a bit exaggerated and are still not convinced that the NSA activities have gone to far, I would like to pose one last question. Are we winning the war on terror when we’re losing freedom everyday?</p>
