---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: An Emergent Class of Underemployment
author:
  display_name: ''
  login: ''
  email: ''
  url: ''
excerpt: In America, you either are or you aren't, and educated underemployment clearly
  isn't. We need practical economic solutions to the misery of underemployment.
wordpress_id: 7339
wordpress_url: http://distilledmagazine.com/?p=7339
date: '2013-08-19 06:37:00 +0000'
date_gmt: '2013-08-19 06:37:00 +0000'
---
<p dir="ltr">As a graduate student during the <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Great_Recession" target="_blank">Great Recession</a>, I have known many talented, credentialed, hard-working people who have been rendered desperate, unable to find a job.  These are people with college degrees, graduate degrees, expensive educations, and enviable work habits left searching desperately for a job—any job—that would give them the opportunity to show their worth.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">These people do not fit a narrative.  They are not high-school dropouts or partially-skilled workers trying to ply a trade that has been left behind by history.  They committed no crime and missed no easy opportunity.  They simply reached the end of their schooling, put in applications in a weak labor market, and never received a job.  Bewildered and forgotten, these unfortunate few invariably end up living with their parents.  Dreams fade; friendships and connections become painful reminders of what has been lost as the bitterness sets in indefinitely.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Eventually, some job comes along.  Some employer recognizes the wasted talent, or a family friend takes pity and brings the unfortunate soul into the workforce.  Often marginally related to their education and offering little opportunity for advancement, these jobs are way stations waiting for an express train that will probably never come.  Better than the self-loathing of unemployment but writhing in underachievement, these jobs are neither destinations nor stepping stones.  They are work, and they are somewhere to go during the week.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">The future remains a painful subject.  In America, you either are or you aren’t, and the new job clearly isn’t.  Student-loan payments barely cover the interest; homeownership is pure fantasy; and where would they send children to school if they had them?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">I know these people because they have been my classmates for years.  They return to school.  Stuck in a dead end rut with no real hope of advancement in their job, they take the only path that gives them any real hope for the future.  They are not necessarily looking to get more educated, just to give it another go and to get a slight leg up on their fellow applicants.  Faced with enough debt to sink a mortgage application already, they really have nothing to lose.  A couple years and a few more decimals of debt are a small price to pay for hope and self-respect.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">These are the untold stories of the Great Recession.  They are not as desperate as some, and they do not show up in many economic indicators.  They are born of a terribly weak labor market throughout the skill levels, but they are also born out of oppressive inequality.  These are young people who were shooting for the top five percent who did not quite make it.  Instead, they are caught in the morass of underemployment.  Some weakness—bad interviewing, a bad grade, or simply bad timing—left them on the wrong side of the gate with no key.  They are left with a choice: either admit that their diligence and hard work had been for naught, leaving them no better off than their unaccomplished peers or double down, pile on more debt and reinitiate the process.  It can be quite a <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Faust" target="_blank">Faustian bargain</a>.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Seeing this story over and again, you must forgive me if I am unconvinced by the idea that people are paid simply according to their skills and ability.  Without any great travesty, I have seen dozens of students, on the path to hundreds of thousands in salary, fall to dead-end jobs in middle income with overwhelming student debt.  Nowhere is this dichotomy as stark as the legal world, where corporate firms are tickets to the one percent and public defenders have small-town salaries with New York debt.  A million dollars or more in future salary may be riding on a first impression in a single interview.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Perhaps in theory, an unsuccessful interviewee would simply slide down and take the next available job, but in practice, the theory is wrong.  In a weak labor market, lives can be irretrievably derailed in interview rooms and by cover letters.  Far from being a simple function of ability and achievement, employment outcomes critically hinge on every factor coming together at once.  Awkwardness in an interview can overwhelm years of diligence and credentials because an employer knows that another candidate will come in an hour.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Recent data confirms that underemployment is a significant problem for recent college graduates.  Although statistics consistently show that <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/ep_chart_001.htm" target="_blank">unemployment rates fall </a>with every step of the education ladder,  <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Underemployed%20Report%202.pdf" target="_blank">recent research by the Center for College Affordability &amp; Productivity</a> shows that 48 percent of college graduates are employed in jobs that traditionally have not required a college education.  Eventually, students get employed but the jobs they accept do not fit their educational goals.  This is the misery of underemployment—years of student debt without the employment to repay it.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Aside from obvious implications for the idea of a meritocracy and the danger that prejudice could keep otherwise qualified applicants from jobs, this idea has an important theoretical implication.  Namely, it points to the importance of effectively emergent properties in the employment market.  Emergent properties happen when a combined whole is far greater than the sum of the parts.  As <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/hodgson-on-methodological-individualism.html" target="_blank">Geoffrey Hodgson explains</a>, “A property may be said to be emergent if its existence and nature depend upon entities at a lower level, but the property is neither reducible to, nor predictable from, properties of entities found at the lower level.”</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">In other words, employees get hired at significantly higher-paying jobs because their underlying characteristics coalesce in an unpredictable way.  Only if every factor comes together in an interview process will those factors turn into great rewards in the employment market.  A particular degree or credential only has significant market value if it is combined with innumerable other factors in a job application, including luck, personality, and family network connections, to make a successful applicant.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">This view differs from and contrasts with the idea that people are paid piecewise according to their characteristics.  According to the piecewise or partial-effect hypothesis, a professional degree has a certain value in the market that it adds to each recipient individually.  If we know their credentials and skills accurately enough, then we can predict their results in the labor market by summing the partial effects.  Everyone receives a certain return from their education investment.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Unfortunately, it does not seem to work out that way.  When candidates fall out of the normal interview process, their degrees can suddenly become as much a hindrance as an asset.  Does a business-owner really want to hire a candidate with a professional degree as a salesman, when it appears that he is taking a step down?  Often, the answer is no, and the failed candidate may only look on those jobs as forgone opportunities.  Skills and training act as bad signals away from their intended specialty areas.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">The policy implications are significant.  First, the existence of emergent properties would significantly strengthen the argument for short-term employment support.  The experiences of young professionals that have fallen out of the labor market are bleak and suggest that their long-term value is being significantly hindered by extended unemployment or underemployment.  This creates wasted talent and education that will remain unused in dead-end jobs.  Allowing a weak labor market to linger will increase the amount of people caught in this trap and create an<a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Hysteresis_%28economics%29" target="_blank"> underemployment hysteresis</a>,  where past underemployment creates future underemployment.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Avoiding this permanent loss greatly strengthens the argument for expansionary fiscal and monetary policy.  Acknowledging the real possibility of hysteresis renders obsolete the idea of a single potential output or natural rate of unemployment, as allowing a weak labor market would actively decrease potential by allowing the underemployment trap.  Longer periods of weak labor conditions lower the market value of societal skills and education through persistent underemployment.  A prudent policymaker would strengthen the labor market for both short-term and long-term prosperity.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Second, this view calls into question the fairness of non-dischargeable student debt.  <a href="http://distilledmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/bankruptcy" target="_blank">U.S. student loans are not dischargeable in bankruptcy outside of a showing of undue hardship</a>. The rationale is that students who discharged student loans after their education would be getting something for nothing, increased skills in the labor market that should be able to repay the underlying loan.  However, if more students fall into the underemployment trap with little hope of productive repayment, then we may need to acknowledge that this millstone is unacceptable.  In a weak labor market, student loans prey on ambition and hope with a dangerous lottery.  Reasonable programs that give options to young people saddled with debt when employment outcomes go awry seems the least we must do if we insist on being the only advanced country that puts so extreme a private burden on education funding.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Finally, significant emergent properties or interactions present challenges to statistical analysis of employment outcomes.  Any regression analysis that evaluates each characteristic individually will be grossly misleading because it will assign the emergent properties individually, despite the fact that they only have value as a whole.  Moreover, sufficient interaction terms to catch the effect are likely to be unrealistic if amorphous interview qualities have significant effects on outcomes.  Statistical methods struggle with immeasurable factors.  In other words, identifying and predicting the people who are likely to fall into this underemployment trap may be impossible.  This difficulty limits are ability to prevent the issue with direct targeting, rather than blanket measures to support the labor market.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">Underemployment, even toward the higher end of the skills spectrum, has been devastating in the aftermath of the Great Recession.  Hard-working, talented people have been left desperate for any job or school that will take them, and this desperation has created the potential for a huge loss in human capital.  Examining the successes and failures suggests that a piecewise understanding of labor outcomes is misguided and that complex interactions create hugely divergent outcomes for similarly skilled candidates.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p dir="ltr">It is time that economists and policymakers acknowledge these complex interactions and dispense with Platonic ideas of potential output and wages according to marginal productivity.  Even valuable skills have important interactions with arbitrary variables like macroeconomic conditions and interview quality.  These create strong arguments that expansionary macroeconomic policies can have significant long-term impacts.  Most importantly, losers in the employment market should be treated with practical respect, rather than legal belittlement.</p>
